Propose an improvement of log messages usability (#525)
kyma-project/community: internal/proposals/logs/improvement-of-log-messages-usability.md

- **context** - structure of the contextual information, such as operation (for example: `starting workers`), handler/ resolver (for example: `ProvisionRuntime`), controller, resource-namespaced name (for example: `production/application1`), operation ID, instance ID, operation stage, and so on. Users must be able to filter the logs so all the info provided here must be a useful and unique minimal set for every operation. Users must be able to find the needed resource in some store so provide here a name instead of an ID if it's easier to use later.
- **traceid** - 16-byte numeric value as a base16-encoded string. It'll be passed through a header, so the user can filter all the logs regarding the whole business operation in the whole system.
- **spanid** - 16-byte numeric value as a base16-encoded string. It'll be randomly generated for each request handling so the user can filter the component logs for a specific operation handling.

> >**NOTE:** traceid and spanid are required in the logs to be compliant with the [OpenTelemetry standards](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/114/files). The standard is still in the development phase, so we should keep an eye on it and change it accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**NOTE:** The **traceid** and **spanid** fields are required in the logs to be compliant with the [OpenTelemetry standards](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/114/files). The standard is still in the development phase, so we should keep an eye on it and change it accordingly.
```

- Transparency - every entry must be as short as possible but containing all essential information about the process
- Tracing - entries sequence must be connected so there is an easy way to filter logs concerning a specific operation
- GDPR-compliance - entries must not contain any sensitive data (password, personal data in the meaning of GDPR)
- No "responsibility overlapping" - Because there are other tools to help in diagnosis, logs, in general, should not contain the information which can be taken from that tools (i.e there's tracing which can be used for timings)

Additional assumptions:

- If there is one quick solution for an occurring issue, add it to the message on the DEBUG level so the operator could use it while debugging
- If operation will be retried, say when
- JSON format should be enabled only on environments where the monitoring is enabled. Text format is more readable for debugging purposes so make it configurable
- In case of debug level add the error stack tracing
- Don't put redundant data into the logs. If something failed 10 times, log that it failed 10 times instead of printing the same error 10 times

## Log structure

> To unify the logs, therefore to make debugging process much easier and to make logs parsing also super easy, I'd like to propose a single log format so every service, job and all the components could follow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To unify the logs, which will make the debugging process and logs parsing much easier, I'd like to propose a single log format that every service, job, and all the components should follow:
```

> - timestamp - RFC3339 Date and time with timezone. For example: "2012-12-12T07:20:50.52Z"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Timestamp - RFC3339 format of date, time, and timezone. For example: "2012-12-12T07:20:50.52Z".
```

Reviewer: If these are the names of fields, I'd leave them lowercase and format them instead, for example with **bold** formatting.

Author: Ok! I'll do that

- level - logging level. For example: "ERROR"

> - message - information with the presented format (notice that there no additional data that could be duplicated in the context structure):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- message - human-readable information with the specified format (notice that there is no data duplication in the context structure):
```

>     - error and fatal message: Past tense started with for example "Failed to...", after that the error wrapped with some meaningful context but without additional "failed to" or "error occurred". For example: "Failed to provision runtime: while fetching release: while validating relese: release does not contain installer yaml"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - error and fatal message: past tense started with, for example, `Failed to...`, after that the error wrapped with some meaningful context. For example: `Failed to provision runtime: while fetching release: while validating release: release does not contain installer yaml`.
```

>     - info message: Present Continuous tense for the things that are about to be done, for example "Starting processing..." or past tense for the things that are finished, like "Finished successfully!"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - info message: present continuous tense for the things that are about to be done, for example, `Starting processing...`, or past tense for the things that are finished, such as `Finished successfully!`.
```

>     - notice and warning message: A short explanation on what happened and what this can cause. For example: "Tiller configuration not found in the release artifacts. Proceeding to the Helm 3 installation..." or "Connection is not yet established. Retrying in 5 minutes..."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - notice and warning message: a short explanation of what happened and what this can cause. For example: `Tiller configuration not found in the release artifacts. Proceeding to the Helm 3 installation...` or `Connection is not yet established. Retrying in 5 minutes...`.
```

> - context - structure of a text contextual information such as operation (for example: "starting workers"), handler/ resolver (for example: "ProvisionRuntime"), controller, resource namespaced name (for example: "production/application1", operation ID, instance ID, operation stage and so on. User must be able to filter the logs that are needed so all the info provided here must be useful and be an unique minimal set for every operation. User must be able to find the needed resource in some store so provide here a name instead of an ID if it's easier to use later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- context - structure of the contextual information, such as operation (for example: `starting workers`), handler/ resolver (for example: `ProvisionRuntime`), controller, resource-namespaced name (for example: `production/application1`), operation ID, instance ID, operation stage, and so on. Users must be able to filter the logs so all the info provided here must be a useful and unique minimal set for every operation. Users must be able to find the needed resource in some store so provide here a name instead of an ID if it's easier to use later.
```

> - traceid - 16-byte numeric value as Base16-encoded string. It'll be passed through a header, so the user can filter all the logs regarding the whole business operation in the whole system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- traceid - 16-byte numeric value as a base16-encoded string. It'll be passed through a header, so the user can filter all the logs regarding the whole business operation in the whole system.
```

> - spanid - 16-byte numeric value as Base16-encoded string. It'll be randomly generated for each request handling so the user can filter the component logs for a specific operation handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- spanid - 16-byte numeric value as a base16-encoded string. It'll be randomly generated for each request handling so the user can filter the component logs for a specific operation handling.
```

> > traceid and spanid are required in the log to be compliant with the [OpenTelemetry standards](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/114/files). Keep in mind that the standard is still in the development phase so we should keep eye on it and change it accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**NOTE:** traceid and spanid are required in the logs to be compliant with the [OpenTelemetry standards](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/114/files). The standard is still in the development phase, so we should keep an eye on it and change it accordingly.
```

Reviewer: Also, we link to the open PR. Should we do that?

> ### Log format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Log format
```

> Log format should be configured and changeable. I'd like to propose a Helm Chart key `log.format` which could have two values, `json` or `text`. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log format should be configured and changeable. I'd like to propose the **log.format** Helm chart key which could have two possible values: `json` or `text`. For example:
```

Reviewer: `Log format should be configured and changeable.` -> let's discuss

```yaml
log:
  format: "json"
```

> In the `deployment.yaml` or other component container specification there will be an environment variable, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `deployment.yaml` file or other component's container specification, there will be an environment variable, for example:
```

```yaml
    spec:
      containers:
        - env:
          - name: APP_LOG_FORMAT
            value: {{ .Values.global.log.format }}
          ...
```

> #### Key-Value Pairs examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Key-value pairs example
```

```text
2012-12-12T07:20:50.52Z WARNING Tiller configuration not found in the release artifacts. Proceeding to the Helm 3 installation... context.resolver=ProvisionRuntime context.operationID=92d5d8fd-cbdc-4b7a-9bc3-2b2eccfcb109 context.stage=InstallReleaseArtifacts context.shootName=c-3a38b3a context.runtimeId=19eb9335-6c13-4d40-8504-3cd07b18c12f traceid=0354af75138b12921 spanid=14c902d73a
```

> #### JSON examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### JSON example
```

```json
{
  "timestamp": "2012-12-12T07:20:50.52Z",
  "level": "WARNING",
  "message": "Tiller configuration not found in the release artifacts. Proceeding to the Helm 3 installation...",
  "context": {
    "resolver": "ProvisionRuntime",
    "operationID": "92d5d8fd-cbdc-4b7a-9bc3-2b2eccfcb109",
    "stage": "InstallReleaseArtifacts",
    "shootName": "c-3a38b3a",
    "runtimeID": "19eb9335-6c13-4d40-8504-3cd07b18c12f"
  },
  "traceid": "0354af75138b12921",
  "spanid": "14c902d73a"
}
```

> ## What should **not** be logged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What should not be logged
```

> We should be careful about the information we put in logs. Every log should be easily connectable with the issue or the error but there should be no internal or confidential data provided in any log entry. Here is what should not be logged:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We should be careful about the information we put in logs. Every log should be easily connectable with the issue or the error but there should be no internal or confidential data provided in any log entry. Here is the list of items that should not be logged:
```

> - authorization data such as passwords, usernames, certificates and tokens. Note that sometimes basic auth could be used in the url such as `http://username:password@example.com/` and other tokens like `http://www.example.com/api/v1/users/1?access_token=123` so you need to be extra careful in these cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Authorization data, such as passwords, usernames, certificates, and tokens. Note that sometimes basic auth or other tokens can be used in the URL, for example: `http://username:password@example.com/` or  `http://www.example.com/api/v1/users/1?access_token=123` so you need to be extra careful in these cases.
```

> - personal identifiable information such as tenant names. If the personal identifiable information is required in the audit log it should be encrypted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Person-identifiable information, such as tenant names. If the person-identifiable information is required in the audit log, it should be encrypted.
```

> - user input to avoid Log Injection. If user input is required in the log, it should be parsed and validated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User input to avoid log injection. If user input is required in the logs, it should be parsed and validated.
```
